Define Atom! !The smallest piece of an element which can be broken down into three subatomic particles! !Define Subatomic Particles! !Protons(-), Neutrons(0), Electrons(-)! !Define Atomic Number! !Represents the number of protons in an atom! !Define Atomic Mass! !The mass of the atom measured in amu! !Define Valance Electrons! !The electrons in the outermost shell (main energy level) of an atom; these are the electrons involved in forming bonds! !Define Isotope! !An atom of an element that varies in mass due to a different number of neutrons! !Define Element! !A pure substance that cannot be broken down into a simpler substance (only one type of atom)! !Define Molecule! !Molecules form when two or more atoms form chemical bonds! !Define Ion! !A charged atom. It has a different number of electrons than they originally had! !Define Polyatomic Ions! !They are ions composed of several atoms joined covalently. The carge for polyatomic ions is for the collection of atoms and not just for the atom written last! !Define Compound! !Molecules made up of two or more different elements! !Define Ionic Bond! !If metals give away their electrons to non-metals, they form an ionic bond. The oppositely charged ions are held together by an electrostatic attraction! !Define Covalent Bond! !A covalent bond is formed when two or more non-metallic atoms share a pair of valance electrons. Each bond represents two electrons (More than one pair of electrons can be shared)! !Define Lewis Dot Diagrams! !In this type of representation, only valance electrons are shown. The electrons are placed around the symbol. After one on each side, electrons are paired. This diagram is also known as electron dot diagrams and can be used for describing, predicting, and explaining compound formation! !Define Bohr Models! !Model of an atom that shows electrons in circular orbits around the nucleus (consisting of protons and neutrons)! !Define Acid! !Acids, according to Arhennius, acids are molecular substances that break apart in water to produce the H+ ion. Acids can be strong or weak and the strength depends on the concentration of H+ in the solution! !Define Base! !Bases are substances that break apart in water to creat the hydroxide ion OH- in water. Bases can be strong or weak. The strength of a base is determined by the amound of hydroxide ion! !Define Acid-Base Indicator! !Substances whose colour varies depending on the pH of a solution. They are used when approximation is allowed and change colour over a relatively low pH range. Different indicators will change colours at different pH levels so a combination of indicators are used to narrow down the pH range of the sample being tested! !Define pH scale! !A scale of acidity and basicity(alkalinity). It is a scale that shows the power of Hydrogen in a substance. The pH scale is a measure of the number of H+ ions in a solution. A higher H+ concentration means that the pH is very low. If there are a lot of OH- ions compared to H+, then the pH level is high. A change in 1 is a 10x difference meaning ph of 5 is 10x stronger acid than pH of 6! !Define Acid Rain! !Acid precipitation is any precipitation that has a pH of less than 5.6. The main causes are SO2 and nitrogen oxides! !Define precipitate! !In a reaction, this is a new substance with a lower solubility! !Define Aqueous! !Dissolved in Water! !Define Coefficient! !A number that is written in front of a chemical symbol and indicates the number of atoms, formula units, or molecules! !Define Subscript! !The number written in the bottom right hand corner behind the symbol of an element. It is used to indicate the number of atoms of that element in a compound or molecule. A subscript behind brackets multiplies all the elements inside the brackets! !Define Formula Mass! !The mass of an ionic compound! !Define Molecular Mass! !The mass of a covalently bonded compound! !Define Electrolyte! !Any substance that conducts an electric current (when in a water solution). A strong electrolytre would break almost completely (100%) into ions in water (strong acids and bases), whereas weak electrolytes produce fewer ions (<100%) in solution (weak acids and base)! ! SUBJECT ! ! SUBJECT ! !Define Speed! !The distance covered in a certain time period. How fast something is moving. Symbol v, units are m/s and km/h, and is scalar! !Define Velocity! !The speed and direction of motion. Describes how fast on object's position is changing. Symbol v(with arrow), Average velocity has subscript av, Instantaneous velocity has subscript inst, units are m/s, km/h, Vector! !Define Displacement! !The change in position for an object. Symbol: delta d with arrow Standard unit: meter If an object ends up back where it started, displacement is zero. A vector quantity! !Define Position! !An object's location in terms of a "frame of reference". An objects initial starting position is usually 0. Symbol is d with arrow and measured usually in meters. It is a vector quantity! !Define Time! !The duration of an event usually measured in seconds (s), but minutes(min), or hours (h) are also used. Symbol is t and this is a scalar quantity! !Define Acceleration! !Describes how much an object's speed or velocity changes in a certain time. The symbol is a with an arrow or just a(idk why). There is average (av) and instantaneous (inst) acceleration. Units are m/s^2 or kh/h/s. This is vector quantity and apparantly scalar! !Define Constant Motion! !The velocity remains the same over a period of time! !Define Scalar! !Those quantities that only have a size (magnitude). These are italicised! !Define Vector! !Those quantities that have both size and direction. The direction is usually found in square brackets after the units. (Compass points are usually used, as are positive and negative). Vectors are represented with either a boldfaced type or with an arrow above the symbol! !Define Frame of Reference! !From where an objects position is measured! !Define Momentum! !The quantity of motion and is the product of mass and velocity! !Define Impulse! !Impulse is equal to the change in momentum and impulse is the force exerted for a time that causes the change! !Define Conservation of Energy! !Energy can neither be created or destroyed, but can be changed from one form to another. All natural events involve a transformation of energy from one form to another, but the total quantity of energy does not change  during a transformation! !Define Second Collision! !When an individual hits the steering wheel, windshield, tree, or any rigid object! !Define Force! !Force is anything that causes displacement or deformation of an object or shape! !Define Reaction Time! !The time it takes to asses a dangerous situation and then apply appropriate actions! !Define Braking Distance! !The distance you cover while breaking. The distance required to stop after the brakes have been applied! !Define Total Stopping Distance! !The total distance which is the sum of the distance in reaction time and braking distance! !Define Friction Force! !Depends on 1) Types of surfaces involved 2) The amount of contact between the two surfaces 3) The amount of force acting on the two surfaces (Mass is greater so the force of the object or the surface is larger, resulting in greater force)! !What is kinematics! !The study of motion of objects without reference to the forces causing the motion! !What is Dynamics! !Studies both motion and the forces which cause the motion. Cause and Effect! !What is Delta! !Change in! !What is Distance! !The length of a journey along every twist and turn of the path and it is symbol d measured usually in meters and is scalar! !If A is at position +100, and be is at position +25, what is the distance and displacement when travelling there and back! !150m and 0! !Draw a vector line for 15km [W]! !Cool! !Draw a vector line for 250km [S]! !Cool! !Draw a vector diagram for a journet 5km [N], 10.km [E], 15km [S], 10.km [W] and calculate displacement! !10km [S]! !Draw a vector diagram for a journey 15.0m [E], 5.00m [S] and calculate displacement! !15.8m [N 18.4 S]! !Draw a vector diagram for a journey 3.00m [S], 9.00m [W], 6.00m [N] and calculate displacement! !9.49m [W 18.4 N]! !What is the formula for speed! !v=d/t! !What is the formula for velocity! !velocity=displacement/changeInTime! !What are the steps for solving problems! !1) List all of the variables given 2) List the variable that you want to find 3) Write out the equation you will be using 4) Plug the variables into the equation and solve 5) Place a box around your final answer! !A train is travelling at a constant speed through the countryside and has a displacement of 150km [E] in a time of 1.7h. What is the velocity of the train?! !88km/h [E]! !A school athlete runs 1.00 x 10^2 m in 12.20s. What is the speed in m/s and km/h! !8.20 m/s [forward] and 29.5 km/h [forward]! !A student rides a bicycle along a straight road for 30.0s. She travels 254m away from her home. Find the speed she is travelling at! !8.47 m/s! !A car is moving east at 90.0 km/h along a straight highway. Find the distance the car has travelled after 1.20h! !108km! !A student is walking with a constant velocity along a straight sidewalk. At a time of 1.4s, his position is 31.4m. Later at a time of 6.1s, his position is 9.6m. What is the students velocity! !-4.6 m/s! !A student is walking with a constant velocity along a straight sidewalk. At a time of 1.4s, his position is 31.4m. Later at a time of 6.1s, his position is 9.6m. The velocity is -4.6m/s. What is the position at 4.4s! !+18m! !A student is walking with a constant velocity along a straight sidewalk. At a time of 1.4s, his position is 31.4m. Later at a time of 6.1s, his position is 9.6m. The velocity is -4.6m/s. At time of 4.4s the position is +18m. At what time is the student's position 12.0m! !5.6s! !What is the difference between speed and velocity? Use examples to help answer this question! !Speed has no directon, Velocity has like 1m/s is speed and +1m/s is velocity! !A train travels at a constant speed through the countryside and has a displacement of 190km [W] in a time of 6.0 h. What is the train’s velocity?! !32 km/h [W]! ! SUBJECT ! ! SUBJECT ! !What is Ecology?! !Ecology is the branch of science dealing with the study of interactions among organisms and with their environment. (The word "eco" comes from the Greek word oikos which means house)! !Who are scientists who study ecology! !Ecologists! !What areas do ecologists tend to study which are smaller areas! !Ecosystems! !What are abiotic factors! !Non-Living Factors! !What are Biotic Factors! !Living Factors! !What are 5 examples of abiotic factors?! !Water, Sunlight, Soil, Nutrients, Temperature! !What are 5 biotic factors! !Plants, Animals, Fungi, Bacteria, Scavangers! !What is a habitat?! !The place in an ecosystem where a living thing lives! !What is niche?! !The combination of the job an organism does in the place in which it lives in! !Break down the biosphere! !Biosphere, Ecosystem, Community, Population, Organism! !Break down Organisms! !Organism, Organ Systems, Organ, Tissue, Cell! !What are producers! !Organisms who make food! !What are consumers! !Organisms who cannot make their own food! !What are Decomposers! !Organisms like bacteria and fungi who eat dead plant and animal remains and convert them into substances that can be reused. They are the recyclers of the ecosystem! !What are 5 biogeochemical cycles! !The Water Cycle, The Carbon Cycle, The Nitrogen Cycle, The Phosphorus Cycle, The Oxygen Cycle! !How much is the amount of solar energy diverted into living things in relation to the total energy received by the Earth?! !Small! !Energy is _____! !Transformed to heat! !What is a food web?! !Transfer of food energy from plants through a series of organisms! !How much energy is lost to next level?! !90%! !What do all living things require?! !Energy! !What is the ultimate source of energy?! !Sun! !What do producers like plants and algae do when they capture the sun's enegy and transform it?! !Make organic compounds! !What are primary consumers?! !Herbivores! !What are herbivores?! !Consumers who ead directly plants! !What are examples of herbivores?! !Moose, Cattle, Grasshopper, Rabbits! !What are carnivors?! !Consumers who eat other consumers! !What are some examples of carnivores?! !Wolves, Northern Pike, Eagles, Polar Bears, Lady Bugs, Snapping Turtles! !What are scavangers?! !Carnivores who eat on dead animals! !What are some examples of scavengars?! !Blowflies, Turkey Vultures, Eagles, Seagulls, Ravens! !What are omnivores! !Consumers who feed on producers and consumers! !What is a trophic level?! !Steps an organism requires to obtain food from plants! !What are food webs?! !Food chains connected in complex manner! !What are ecological pyramids?! !Shows energy flow among the trophic levels! !What is a pyramid of energy?! !Shows energy at each level! !What is photosynthesis?! !The process in which producers use the suns energy to synthesize food form simple inorganic compounds such as carbon dioxide and water! !What is the formula for photosynthesis?! !6CO2 (carbon dioxide) + 6H2O (water) + Light energy from the sun --> C6H12O6 (glucose) + 6O2 (oxygen)! !Why does photosynthesis occur?! !Because of chlorophyll activated in cells! !What is cellular respiration?! !Living things who use oxygen to break down sugars to generate ATP! !What is the chemical formula for cellular respiration?! !C6H12O6 (glucose) + 6O6 (Oxygen) --> 6CO2 (carbon dioxide) + 6H2O (water) + ATP (Energy)! !Who undergoes cellular repiration?! !All Organisms! !What percent of sun's energy is fixed in photosynthesis?! !0.1%! !What percent of average sunlight shining on green plants is absorbed by photosynthetic machinery?! !50%! !What percent of absorbed energy in producers is converted to food energy?! !1-5%! !What is net production?! !Organic matter stored in plant tissues in excess of respiration and represents food potentially available to heteroprophs! !What is total assimilation rate?! !Designated as production which is the total amount of organic matter fixed, including that used up by plant respiration during the measurement period! !How much do plants and animal life depend on naturally occuring elements?! !1/6! !What is a biogeochemical cycle?! !The circular path of the chemical elemets passing back and forth between organisms and the non-living organisms. Biogeochemical cycles are the processes by which nutrients move through organisms and the environment! !Why are biogeochemical cycles looked together at times?! !They operate continuously and concurrently! !What causes biogeochemical cycles to work?! !Energy! !What does bio refer to?! !Living Organisms! !What does geo refer to?! !rocks, soil, air, water! ! CARBONCYCLE ! ! CARBONCYCLE ! !Where is the smallest amount of inorganic carbon found and in what form?! !In the air as carbon dioxide! !What percent does carbon dioxide make of the air?! !0.0375%! !How much is carbon being withdrawn from the air as CO2 to be used by photosynthesis per year?! !16 billion tons! !What are the four pools of carbon?! !Ocean (water) - dissolved CO2; Air (0.037%); Biota (green plants); Fossil fuels and peat/humus (organic matter in soils)! !Draw the carbon cycle! !Cool!! !What happens between water and air?! !Diffusion! !What happens between biota and fossil fuels?! !Biota decays! !What happens between (water and air) to biota?! !Photosynthesis! !What happens between biota to (water and air)?! !Cellular Respiration! !What do producers take from the atmosphere?! !CO2! !Where is carbon not recycled quickly?! !coal and soil! !Is carbon still being stored in beds of peat?! !Yes! !Where is the main reservoir of carbon dioxide?! !Dissolved in water! !What are grasslands great at?! !Valuable storage for carbon! !Where is 60% of our nations carbon stored?! !In wetlands! !What is a carbon sink?! !An area that removes and stores more carbon than it releases! !What are the categories of matter?! !Inorganic and Organic Matter! !How are organic substances found?! !When carbon and hydrogen are together! !What are some examples of organic substances?! !Proteins, sugars (C6H12O6) and fat! !What makes inorganic matter?! !They do not contain hydrogen and carbon. Ionic substances can be inorganic matter! !What are some examples of inorganic matter?! !CO2, CO, HCO3 (ionic), NH3 (ammonia), H2O! !What is one way inorganic matter is recycled into more complex organic substances?! !Photosynthesis! ! CARBONCYCLE ! ! CARBONCYCLE ! ! SUBJECT ! ! SUBJECT ! !What is weather?! !The condition of air around us! !What factors cause weather?! !Temperature, Moisture, Air Pressure, and Wind! !What is climate?! !An area's typical pattern of weather conditions and temperature over a long period of time! !What is atmosphere?! !The blanket of air earth is surrounded by which is a mixture of gases! !What percent of the air is Nitrogen?! !78%! !How is oxygen used?! !Used by organisms as they breathe! !How is Nitrogen used?! !Used by living things to make proteins! !How is carbon dioxide used?! !Used by plants to make food! !What is the layer closest to earth?! !Troposphere! !How thick is the troposphere?! !10 to 16km! !What is uniquie about the Troposhpere?! !It is the only later that contains enough air for living things to breathe! !What is above the troposphere?! !Stratosphere! !Where is ozone found?! !In the stratosphere! !Why is ozone important?! !It protects us from the harmful radiation reaching the earth! !What are layers of earth furthur out?! !The Mesosphere and Thermosphere! !What is the hydrosphere?! !All the water on the earth's surface! !What blanket of air is the earth surrounded by?! !Atmosphere! !The atmosphere is a mixture of what?! !Gases! !What is 78% of the atmosphere?! !Nitrogen! !What is the layer of atmosphere closest to Earth?! !Troposphere! !What does ozone keep from reaching the Earth?! !The sun's harmful radiation! !What are rivers, ponds, glaciers, and oceans part of the Earth?! !Hydrosphere! !T or F: Weather is the condition of air around us! !T! !T or F: Only the stratosphere contains enough air for living things to breathe! !F! !T or F: All weather occurs in the mesosphere! !F! !T or F: The air in the thermosphere becomes thinner until it fades into space! !T! !T or F: There are several layers of the atmosphere! !T! !T or F: Nitrogen keeps most of the sun's harmful radiation for reaching Earth! !F! !T or F: The Ozone layer is found in the stratosphere! !T! !Why are gases of the environment important to living things?! !Gases are important since they help with many areas so we can live. Nitrogen is used by living things to make proteins. Living things use oxygen to breathe. Carbon dioxide is used by plants to make food. Ozone protects us from the sun's radiation.! !What are the four factors that determine weather?! !Temperature, Moisture, Air Pressure, Wind! !What percent of solar radiation is abosrbed by atmosphere and clouds?! !19%! !What percent of solar radiation is absorbed by the Earth's surface?! !51%! !What percent of solar radiation is reflected and scattered?! !30%! !What is radiation?! !Moving particles in a warm object creates electromagnetic waves that send the energy to another object. These waves do not need a medium to travel through so they can travel through space. When the waves hit an other object, the energy is given to the particles in this new object making it warmer.! !What is conduction?! !Energy is transferred through the collisions of molecules. Heat moves from one place to another without the molecules acctually changing location. Instead, fast vibrating molecules in a hot place simply bump slower moving molecules in a cooler area next to them. This process passes the heat energy along to the slower molecules, making them move faster too.! !How is the suns energy reaching the earth?! !Radiation! !How does the earth heat the air above?! !Conduction! !What is convection?! !Energy is transferred through the movement of particles. In convection, a group of molecules move from one place to another carrying their heat energy with them.! !What energy transfer method is circulation?! !Convection! !What is albedo?! !Ability of a substance to reflect energy.! !What is high albedo?! !The substance will reflect a high amount of energy! !What is low albedo?! !The substance will absorb energy. Good absorbers can be good emitters and can give off a lot of energy.! !What are heat sinks?! !An object that can absorb energy and can become warmer.SIGNAL! !T or F: An object that can absorb energy and become colder is a heat sink! !F! !T or F: Conduction is when energy is transferred by the collision of molecules! !T! !T or F: Radiation is when energy is transferred by molecules not waves! !F! !T or F: Much of the sun's energy is absorbed in space! !F! !T or F: Clean ice and snow will reflect a large percentage of incoming energy! !T! !T or F: Currents in the ocean are caused by convection energy transfer! !T! !What are the best conductors?! !MetalsSIGNALSTOP! !Energy transfer in currents in ocean is by?! !Convection! !Why is radiation the only method by which energy from the sun can reach the earth?! !Radiation is the only method by which energy can reach the Earth from the sun. This is because there are very few particles in space and the other methods require particles.! !Energy is transferred by what in the inside of a car which heats up due to the sun?! !Radiation! !Energy is transferred by what in a lying rock on the shore of a lake to a warm up after a swim?! !Conduction! !Energy is transferred by what in using a "mitt warm pack" to keep your fingers warm?! !Conduction! !Energy is transferred by what in warming up by a fire?! !Radiation! !Energy is transferred by what in the air above warm ground gets warm too! !Convection! !Energy is transferred by what in a microave as a hot dog cooks?! !Radiation! !What energy transfer methods happen when the air right above the earth's surface gets warm?! !Radiation, Conduction, Convection! !What energy transfer methods happen when you put your hand near a stove element and it feels hot?! !Radiation! !What energy transfer methods happen when you touch a stove element and it burns your hand?! !Conduction! !What energy transfer methods happen when you hold a chocolate bar in your hand and it melts?! !Conduction! !The earth absorbs energy from the sun all the time. Why does the earth not get hotter and hotter?! !The energy is constantly in motion and spreading. Along the way, more can be reflected in the process! !What absorbs most of the Sun's energy?! !The Earth! !What are some examples of conductors?! !rocks, soil, and water! !What is a cloud?! !A mass of water droplets or ice crystals that floats in the air.! !How are water droplets formed?! !When water vapour in air condenses! !What are the three main types of clouds?! !Cirrus, Cumulus, and Stratus! !You can study clouds for what?! !To see how weather will change! !What are cirrus clouds?! !White and feathery clouds high in the sky. It is so cold where it is, that these clouds are made entirely of ice crystals.! !What do cirrus clouds signal?! !Rain or snow is coming within a day.! !What are cumulus clouds?! !Cumulus clouds are think, white, and fluffy. They look like piles of cotton. They are formed lower in the atmosphere than cirrus clouds so it is made up of only water droplets.! !Which days are cumulus clouds often seen?! !Summer days! !What type of weather do cumulus clouds mean?! !fair weather